From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> On Sunday,
>> the United States and Israel pounded
Iran with missiles for a second straight
day,
destroying more and more power centers
[music] of the regime. And according to
rights groups, bringing the civilian
[music]
death toll there to well over 100.
MEANWHILE,
IRAN UNLEASHED [music] A WAVE OF
retaliatory attacks that proved deadly.
Three US [music] troops were killed in
action, becoming the first Americans to
die in the war. As one nation, we grieve
for the true American patriots who have
made the ultimate sacrifice
for our nation.
But increasingly, all eyes were on the
Iranian government [music] and the
millions of citizens who have long
opposed it.
And the looming question became whether
a weakened Islamic Republic could
actually [music] be toppled by its own
people.
Today,
my colleague, [music] Farnaz Fassihi,
brings us the view of this pivotal
moment from inside Iran.
>> [music]
>> It's Monday, March 2nd.
Farnaz,
thank you for making time for us on a
Sunday. Really appreciate it. Thank you
for having me, Michael.
So, Farnaz, for the people of Iran and
for the massive diaspora of Iranians who
live outside of the country, including
you,
Sunday, today as we speak, is one of
those hinge days in history. There was a
before and there was an after. And right
now, the after is
a world in which Iran's supreme leader,
who has been in power for over three
decades, has been killed and is no
longer in power.
It's one of those historic days that I
think if for every Iranian, whether
you're a supporter of the government or
you're an opponent, whether you live
inside or you live outside, this is a
new day.
This is a new Iran. Mhm. From the moment
we started hearing about Mr. Khamenei
being potentially killed,
my phone started buzzing. I was getting
text messages and phone calls from my
friends and family members.
>> Mhm. And I was also getting text
messages and calls from some of my
sources in Iran who were asking me, "Do
you know anything? Is the news true? Is
he gone? What have you heard?" No matter
what side of the divide you were on,
this was a monumental moment.
>> [music]
>> And today, [music] Iranians woke up to
the first day of history without Mr.
Khamenei in power. And [music] we don't
know exactly what that's going to mean
yet, but this figure who has loomed very
large for almost four decades [music]
over the fate of Iranians is gone.
Some Iranians were celebrating.
>> [cheering]
>> People were pouring to the streets. I
had several video calls with several
people I know in in Tehran who turned on
the camera and showed me cars honking on
the streets.
People cheering. There were fireworks.
People sticking their heads out of the
windows and chanting freedom, freedom,
and this visceral scream.
>> [screaming]
>> Like a scream of relief almost.
And for the diaspora who are scattered
all over the world, it was a similar
feeling. I watched a group of family
members congregate on FaceTime. Some
were in the US, some were in Europe,
some were in Iran, and everybody
[clears throat]
did a video call, and some of them were
crying. They were just these tears of
relief and shock and joy even. And then
they celebrated with shots. Wow.
>> And there was a lot of cheers. And when
you say diaspora, you quite literally
mean families who were once together in
Iran, and presumably scattered to the
winds across the world once the Islamic
Revolution came in 1979? Exactly.
It feels like a dream for many Iranians
that once they used to all live a few
blocks from each other and have
multi-generational family gatherings.
And under Mr. Khamenei, many of them
have not been able to return to Iran,
and many families have just scattered
like stardust all over the world and
separated from each other.
So, that's clearly the segment of
Iranians both inside and outside the
country who may be on the celebratory
side of the spectrum in the 24-48 hours
since he was killed. What about those
who support him? Presumably, you've been
talking to them as well. What
would you characterize as their
reaction?
For Mr. Khamenei's supporters, this
feels like a big loss.
His supporters started to come out into
the streets
in large numbers and going to mosques
and [music] praying and crying.
>> [laughter]
[music]
>> It feels like the ground is shifting
under them. Not only have they lost
[music] a religious figure that they
reverend and believed in, but they've
also lost a political leader
>> [music]
>> of a system that they have ideological
loyalty to.
IT FEELS LIKE THAT IS IN JEOPARDY, that
they don't know whether this Islamic
Republic that they believe in and they
>> [music]
>> support is going to survive or not
without him.
And you know,
this is the reality of Iran, Michael.
This polarized society
>> Right. and one wonders whatever comes
next, whatever form of government comes
next, how are you going to bring these
two sides anywhere close to each other
or is that even possible?
Right. Because the people doing shots in
their homes uncorking champagne,
those people would seem to have a very
hard time reconciling their
reactions and and their whole world view
with those who are clinging to photos of
the now late supreme leader in the
streets. Exactly. I don't know how these
two sides are going to reconcile. If you
had to estimate, Farnaz, how big would
you describe both of those camps as? The
supporters, the mourners, versus the
dissidents, the opponents, those
celebrating his death.
I would say that the overwhelming
majority of the population in Iran are
opponents of the regime, about 80% and
the core supporters are about 20%.
And I think we can sort of draw this
conclusion from voting patterns. In the
past couple of years when there's been
presidential elections or parliamentary
elections, Iranians who are hardcore
believers of the regime have gone to
polls around 20% has been 20% of the
population. Got it. So, you're
extrapolating from that, which seems
quite reasonable. Right. We can, I
think, draw from that and also like in
January, literally every small and big
town all over Iran saw protests against
the government, including the religious
sort of strongholds of the government
where there were lots of people out
calling for the end of this Islamic
regime.
If we look at the demographics of the
protesters who were killed in January,
they're from all ethnic groups, from a
large geographic area in Iran and
different socioeconomic backgrounds.
Well, because his death is so fresh and
the reactions as you are describing them
are so different, let's talk about this
man who is inspiring such profound
reactions,
Khamenei, and why he inspires such
strong reactions.
Mr. Khamenei is the second supreme
leader of Iran. The first was founding
supreme leader Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini. He came to power in 1979
after the Islamic revolution that
toppled the monarchy. 12 days ago, the
Ayatollah was operated on in an attempt
to stem intestinal bleeding. Early
yesterday, he suffered a heart attack.
He whispered Muslim prayers and died.
>> [music]
>> Iran has named a successor to the
Ayatollah Khomeini, less than a day
after the Ayatollah's death in a Tehran
hospital. 49-year-old Ali Khamenei was
today chosen Khomeini's religious
successor by Iran's Council of Senior
Clerics.
It is widely expected that Mr. Khamenei
succeeded him in 1989.
Ayatollah Khomeini unleashed
anti-Western passions throughout the
Islamic world. Today, there were thinly
veiled hopes that his successors would
be less effective, if not more friendly.
And it is said that while the first
supreme leader led a revolution, Mr.
Khamenei led a state.
He really is the ruler who made sure
that the Islamic Republic went from a
revolutionary idea into a state that
entrenched power.
The Islamic Republic of Iran that we
know today, that has influence over
proxy militant groups and, you know, has
[music] a a nuclear power and missile
and military power was all the vision of
Mr. Khamenei. Mhm. Not only was he the
religious leader of Shiites around the
world, but his Iran would also be this
country that led anti-imperialism,
anti-Americanism,
anti-Israelism. Exactly. [music]
In one of his notorious quotes, he said,
"The reason Hamas now has rockets and
can attack Israel is because of us. We
enabled them to go from rocks and arrows
to missiles and guns with our training
and with our funding." And of course,
the thing that he is known for is his
role in domestic repression.
For a few days, it looked like the start
of a second revolution.
Students on the campus of Tehran
University demanding political and
social reform.
But the response was swift and violent.
Mr. Khamenei had absolute power.
He is known for never giving an inch to
calls for reform. Same team should crush
this youthful idealism. Not the police
or army, but a militia called the Basij,
defenders of the fundamentalist
revolution. Sidelining political
opponents. This government
won't allow us to say what we want.
>> Jailing dissidents. The government's
response has been violence. Armor-clad
police attacking protesters from the
backs of speeding motorcycles. Calling
for brutal and lethal crackdowns on
protesters. These are some of the most
recent images coming out of Iran. The
regime cut off the internet in Iran on
the 8th of January hoping to prevent
coverage of its crackdown on protesters.
Including the recent wave in January
where he personally ordered the
shoot-to-kill order. That we think
killed thousands. Exactly. He ordered
security forces to open fire on unarmed
protesters with lethal force. And as a
result, over 3 days, a massacre
happened. Because Mr. Khamenei did not
tolerate dissent and wanted to suppress
any calls of change. Activists now say
that more than 6,000 people were killed
in Iran's recent crackdown on nationwide
protests, and they warn that number
could rise.
And yet despite the supreme leader's
success in holding back protests by
being so repressive, what we know, we've
talked about it a lot on the show, is
that behind the scenes the regime is
getting weaker and weaker because the
United States and Israel,
which grew increasingly tired of Iranian
state-sponsored terrorism, especially
after October 7th, they basically say
enough is enough. They start unleashing
waves of attacks against Iran, all of
which would seem to make the regime very
aware that its situation had become
precarious. But over the past couple of
days, we now know because the supreme
leader was taken out with relative ease,
it doesn't seem like they were being all
that careful or cautious. This was a
surprise, Michael.
Nobody thought that they would find Mr.
Khamenei above ground and in his
compound during a time where US military
had amassed warships and fighter planes
all around Iran. But at the end, he was
sitting in his office at 9:30 a.m. and
next door to him was a high-profile
meeting of basically all the senior
military commands strategizing for the
war. And why, though? Why why were they
so accessible to these attacks that,
like you said, everybody seemed to know
were coming? Well, I think that it's
possible that they got a little
complacent, that they got a little
sloppy. I think that they calculated
that strikes would happen in the middle
of the night, not at 9:30, 10:00 a.m. on
a work day where lots of children were
in school and people were at work. And
they thought that they had a window to
congregate and plan for attacks that
they thought might be imminent in the
middle of the night. And I think they
miscalculated greatly. Fascinating. And
what many Iranian officials now say is
that Mr. Khamenei had refused to leave
his home and his compound and had
indicated to people around him that if
he's going to get attacked and war
starts, he would rather become a martyr.
I think that in his mind, his legacy
would be better protected if he was seen
as somebody who was not in hiding, was
not afraid, whereas if he would have the
fate of Venezuela's Nicolas Maduro and
get captured or if his regime would be
toppled, he would be humiliated, right?
>> Mhm. So, I think there was this desire
by him to have the kind of ending that
he envisioned and he wanted. Right,
which may be Iranian propaganda after
the fact or may contain some shred of
truth. On the subject of the regime's
sloppiness or complacency, just how many
of its leaders did the US and Israel
kill? And for those of us not as
familiar with Iran's government, how big
a blow to the regime does it represent?
It represents a massive blow to the
regime.
Putting Mr. Khamenei aside, they killed
the commander-in-chief of the
Revolutionary Guards, the defense
minister, and some other senior
officials, but Mr. Khamenei had planned
for this possibility. Mhm. He had
instructed everyone in leadership roles
to name four layers of succession. So,
they planned for the idea that three of
every position in the government might
end up being killed in what ended up
being this weekend's attack and there
would still be someone to succeed that
person. Yes, exactly. Wow. So, at this
moment, I mean, we're talking to you
around 3:00 p.m. Sunday, what is the
state of that succession in the Iranian
government? The state moved very swiftly
to project a sense of control
and orderly transition while they name a
successor for the supreme leader.
>> Mhm. That seems to be where things are
standing.
Okay, well, that's the projection of a
transition, but is the regime actually
in control of Iran and how do we know?
Right now, as of Sunday afternoon, the
regime is still in control of Iran.
We haven't seen any major defections.
They are still in control of security on
the streets. Their security apparatus
are all over the capital. They've set up
checkpoints and stopping cars and
Interesting.
>> surveillance.
They also seem to have maintained their
military ability to retaliate and
strike.
Still launching a barrage of ballistic
missiles at US military targets. They
are attacking Israel and they are firing
off missiles and drones to Arab
countries in the Persian Gulf.
So, the succession is working to the
extent that the people who Khomeini
wanted to be in place in the event of
this attack are still the ones doing the
job. They're pressing the button,
they're firing the missiles, they're
making sure the country is retaliating.
They wanted to make sure that there's no
power vacuum and at the moment we're not
seeing any evidence of a power vacuum.
Mhm.
I mean, the reason that matters so much,
of course, is because President Trump
has been so explicit about his goal
here, regime change. He wants
the people of Iran to anticipate a power
vacuum and to fill it and to topple the
regime.
Well, the majority of Iranian people
have said that they want this regime
toppled, that they want a new Iran.
But right now, I think the priority for
many Iranians is to find safety under
bombs and to make sure that their
families are safe and they survive and
they're scrambling to find food and
gasoline and shelter. We haven't really
seen yet a massive domestic uprising,
but it's only day two and we don't know
what's possible on day two.
Yeah, they took out Mr. Khamenei on day
one and they're still continuing to
strike.
>> [music]
>> I think it's going to take some time
to figure out what's going to happen in
Iran and whether or not
>> [music]
>> this regime will survive.
>> Well, after the break, we're going to
talk about what it might look like
if the regime does not survive and what
it would take for it to be toppled by
its own people.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Farnaz, I want to return to a number you
mentioned
much earlier in this conversation, 80%.
80% of Iranians in theory seem to oppose
the regime and could be ready to help
topple it if at the end of this military
bombardment
the regime is in a shambles.
So, let's talk about that possibility.
Based on what you know, what would it
take for the opposition in Iran to
become organized and confident enough to
try to do what President Trump is
encouraging them to do and that many
[clears throat] of them have long wanted
to do, which is take down this regime.
For the Iranian people inside Iran to be
able to mobilize in a way that they
would lay a central role in toppling the
regime, there has to be strategy and
planning and some sort of unity from
opposition leaders inside the country
and outside the country and also a sense
that the regime and its oppressive tools
and its means of crackdown and killing
have been significantly weakened or
disassembled.
>> Mhm. Otherwise, if people just come to
the streets again, as they did in
January and they're on armed, they risk
lethal crackdowns and death and killings
again.
Understood. But do you see any evidence
that the US and Israel in the targets
that they've chosen and that they've
struck are trying to assist
the opposition and trying to disassemble
the tools of oppression that you just
mentioned?
We do. I think the difference in this
current war in comparison with the June
war with Israel is that the targets have
expanded to not just military missiles
and nuclear sites to structures and
buildings and institutions
that the government used to oppress and
repress. Uh Like what?
>> Like the revolution court today was
attacked. And this is a court that's
highly notorious that tried and
prosecuted political cases and
dissidents. They attacked the state
broadcasting, which is a tool of
propaganda.
And they also went after two military
bases belonging to the Revolutionary
Guards and their underlings, Basij, the
volunteer plainclothes militia that we
see shooting and killing and beating
protesters. And they detonated those two
bases. So, there there is some evidence
at least that the target is widening and
it certainly seems that the goal of the
United States and Israel
is to facilitate regime change on the
ground. Which may or may not ever come
to pass, of course.
And if there won't be
any kind of a revolution here,
is there, Faranak, a leader within the
regime that the US, that Israel might
find tolerable? Who they see as somebody
who could, in theory,
satisfy what remains of the regime, its
loyalists, potentially be acceptable to
the opposition, and
that the US and Israel and its leaders
feel they can do business with?
Basically,
the kind of person that the US found in
Venezuela after it arrested Nicolás
Maduro.
It's interesting you bring up Venezuela
because Iranian sources were telling me
that one of the conversations they're
having in private about succession and
about planning amongst themselves is the
question of who will be the Delcy of
Iran, referring to Venezuela's vice
president.
And some of the names that have come up
are technocrats and former generals of
the Revolutionary Guards who are sort of
seen as centrists, pragmatists, people
who maybe would be open to a change of
course. One of the names is Ali
Larijani, the head of the National
Security Council, who's effectively
running the country right now. General
Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf, a former
Revolutionary Guards commander, who's
the speaker of the parliament and has a
role in commanding the war now. He's
also one of the names that I have heard.
I've also heard the name of former
president Hassan Rouhani, who's a kind
of a moderate cleric, but he's sort of
been outcast from the close circle of
Mr. Khamenei. So, these are some of the
names I've heard. But, I want to mention
here that for that 80% who want
wholesome change and for the opposition
and dissidents no figure that is
associated with the Islamic Republic's
regime is going to be acceptable.
Because every single one of these people
was part of a system and had a role in
those oppressions and killings and
repressions that have been part and
parcel of
this government for 47 years. Right.
>> But, the question is whether the US and
President Trump will ultimately decide
that he doesn't want to risk instability
in Iran, he doesn't want to risk
>> Mhm. civil war and would rather engage
with someone from that system that would
be willing to make concessions or not.
Right.
>> And we heard President Trump say today
that he's open to speaking to Iran's new
leaders and that he's heard that there
are some options for succession. So, I
think he's kind of signaling to the
Iranian regime that if you do have a
character who is willing to give me what
I want and make the kind of concessions
that I want on nuclear and military and
missiles and policies
>> Then I will back that leader. If not
back him, at least I'll engage and
entertain the possibility of that
leader. That will be detrimental to the
aspirations of democracy and freedom for
the Iranian people.
But, politics are a different matter.
>> sense that would be at odds with regime
change and so, President Trump is going
to have to decide what really matters
most to him. Right. Changing the regime
or creating a stable Iran. Those may be
in conflict.
Right. And you know, I think it would be
hugely disappointing to many people in
Iran both inside and outside because you
know, President Trump for all the
reasons we talked about about sort of
the 80% that are celebrating the events
in Iran and the war, he's seen as a
figure who has helped their aspirations
for change right now, but I think that
that could quickly change and they may
feel betrayed if the US strikes a deal
with the successors of Mr. Khamenei.
Well, no matter who leads Iran next,
I wonder if the events of the past few
days
more or less guarantees
that its government is really never the
same, even if it's an insider from the
regime running it. And
by that I really mean it's hard to
fathom Iran returning to the system of
proxies and state-sponsored terror that
really defined Khamenei's 35 years in
power for the simple reason that
over time it resulted in
his own death. It
made the US and it made Israel believe
that the only way
to solve the problem was to take out the
leader.
I think the Islamic Republic as we knew
it is over. Wow. I think the state that
Mr. Khamenei ran, which was hostile to
the US, hostile to its Arab neighbors,
hostile to Israel, and defined militancy
and terror and hostage-taking
and repression of its own citizens is
not sustainable. It's not sustainable
and cannot survive in the new realities
of the Middle East, where we've seen
Israel sort of prioritize its safety and
survival above all else post-October 7.
I don't think it is an Iran that will be
tolerated by its uh restive population
that want change. And uh given the all
the attacks we've seen in the region and
against Arab states, I don't think
Iran's neighbors will tolerate that kind
of a state and this feeling that they're
at risk of being attacked and sort of an
unpredictable
government next door that nobody knows,
you know, what it will do and how it
will react. And I don't think the United
States will necessarily tolerate it
either. So, I think all the odds are
stacked against the Islamic Republic
continuing as it has been for the past
47 years.
Well, just to end for an Oz, I wonder to
that point what members of
the Iranian opposition and the expat
world, the diaspora,
you even, what you're allowing yourself
to hope for
and to
dream of for Iran in this moment of such
extraordinary flux
and fear, but also possibility.
Um
I'm Iranian-American.
And on Friday,
I thought that the possibility of ever
visiting Iran, of visiting my father's
graveside, or seeing my elderly
relatives was a distant dream.
Today,
I have hope.
Of returning? Of returning. A pretty
modest goal.
You know, that's what a lot of Iranians
who've been exiled and who can't go back
say. They say that it's pretty bare
minimum to want to see your relatives
and visit your home country.
And it's a right that has been robbed
from many people.
And I I think
many Iranians the world over have a
glimmer of hope.
Well, let me ask about a perhaps less
modest set of possibilities. I'm I'm
thinking about the people
who were are shots
on Saturday. I mean,
what do they dare to think about beyond
just visiting relatives back in Iran?
They dare to dream of a free Iran.
Where political prisoners are free,
where young people who take to the
streets to demand for a better living
are not shot and killed,
and people are not struggling to make
ends meet because it's a resource-rich
country,
where parents are not mourning their
children.
>> [music]
>> Watching the videos of
people taking to the streets and
chanting [music] freedom, freedom in
reaction to Mr. Soleimani's killing,
it may sound to an American or Western
audience that [music] this is a modest
aspiration, but I think for the Iranian
people who have sort of long aspired and
worked toward having a free,
>> [music]
>> democratic, secular country,
this is a big [music] dream.
And as a reporter who's covered Iran for
three decades,
I never thought that I would be writing
this news or, you know, reporting this.
[music] So, I looked at the front page
of the New York Times today with the
headline
and thought, uh, wow.
This is a This is a headline on a story
I never thought I would write
>> [music]
>> in my lifetime, yeah.
Well, Farnaz,
thank you very much. We really
appreciate it. Thank you for having me,
Michael.
>> [music]
>> In an interview on Sunday night with the
Times,
President Trump said that the American
military [music]
assault against Iran could last up to
four to 5 weeks.
When pressed on his plan for who should
lead Iran's government, the president
[music] offered several seemingly
inconsistent visions.
One scenario, he said, was that the
United States identified a cooperative
leader from inside the regime.
Another scenario, he said, was that
Iran's elite military forces would
simply lay down their weapons and
surrender to the people of Iran.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need
>> [music]
>> to know today. The Constitution can't be
changed by statute. The Constitution
says, "No declaration of war without
Congress." The president has called this
war [music] against Iran. On Sunday,
congressional Democrats questioned the
legality of President Trump's military
strikes against Iran, [music]
saying that it was a clear-cut case
where he needed Congress's approval but
[music] failed to seek it.
One of those Democrats, Senator Tim
Kaine of Virginia,
>> [music]
>> has introduced a resolution seeking to
end the use of American military forces
in Iran. [music] The president not only
did not come to Congress to seek a
debate or vote, he [music] acted without
even notification to the vast majority
of us. This is an illegal war. I have
And
as markets opened on Sunday night, oil
prices [music] rose 10%
highlighting the economic risks of the
conflict in Iran.
The US-Israeli [music] attacks on Iran
could severely restrict oil and gas
supplies around the world. Even if the
disruption is brief,
>> [music]
>> it will almost certainly make energy
more expensive around the world.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Jessica
Chung, Mary Wilson, and Claire Tennis
Getter.
It was edited by Liz O'Brien [music] and
Paige Cowett.
Contains music by Alicia Etoo and Dan
Powell.
Our theme [music] music is by Jim
Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly.
The episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it [music] for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.
>> [music]